MSC3267: Reference relations (#3267)
matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals: proposals/3267-reference-relations.md

# MSC 3267: reference relationships

## Proposal

This proposal defines a relation type (using [MSC 2674 relations](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2674)) for events to make a reference to another event.

A `rel_type` of `m.reference` is defined for future handling replies and
threading. This let you define an event which references an existing
event. When aggregated, this currently doesn't do anything special, but in
future could bundle chains of references (i.e. threads). These do not yet
replace the [reply mechanism currently defined in the spec](https://matrix.org/docs/spec/client_server/latest#rich-replies).

> Reference relations are used by [MSC 2241](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2241) to tie all events together for the same verification request.

Reviewer: I prefer reserving `m.reference` for event type specific references. You wouldn't want to show verification relations as a thread or replies. You want to show them as "is requesting to verify you", "verified you", "failed verification" in the timeline. As such there is a significant conflict of interest between those relation types.

I think the better approach will be to just specify new event types for replies or threads, that can be used for the different aggregation behaviour you would want in those cases. `m.reply` and `m.thread` would be the obvious candidates.

One could argue, that introducing a subtype would solve that, but I'd rather just have a different rel_type or define multiple relations, where one is an extended version of the other and should be picked over another type in the list, if fallback behaviour is wanted (similar to how extensible events work).

Author: > One could argue, that introducing a subtype would solve that, but I'd rather just have a different rel_type or define multiple relations, where one is an extended version of the other and should be picked over another type in the list, if fallback behaviour is wanted (similar to how extensible events work).

This should be discussed here: https://github.com/uhoreg/matrix-doc/blob/aggregations-overview/proposals/2674-event-relationships.md#relation-types, as this MSC is just following those guidelines.

Reviewer: Concern still applies, threads explicitly chose a different way, so only verifications use this at the moment and live location might use it in the future. So imo it is still a bad idea to recommend this for anything that isn't event type specific. It shouldn't be used for replies, because there is no way to distinguish from a different reference relation as replies can be done with most event types.

Reviewer 2: for clarity: the MSC has changed in the last few years to document reality rather than ideals, deliberately. 

Will try to clarify some aspects of this.

For instance, an `m.room.message` which references an existing event
would look like:

```json
{
    "type": "m.room.message",
    "content": {
        "body": "i <3 shelties",
        "m.relates_to": {
            "rel_type": "m.reference",
            "event_id": "$another_event_id"
        }
    }
}
```

## Server aggregation

Even though [MSC 2674](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2674) states that values for `rel_type`

> should define how the server should aggregate the `rel_type`, this MSC does not define how references should be aggregated by the server on the target event. One possibly way would be to aggregate them as an array of event ids, but the final layout is deferred to [MSC 2675](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2675). The aim of this MSC is to just document the status quo of how `m.reference` is used by [MSC 2241](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2241), where server aggregations are not assumed by the client.

Reviewer 3: This is a bit confusing since MSC2675 says it defers the aggregation bundle format to the definition of each relation type, but this now says it is deferring it back to MSC2675.

I suspect this MSC needs to either define the bundle aggregation format or declare that it is not included in the bundled aggregations.

Note that the current format returned by Synapse is a list of event IDs. See matrix-org/synapse#7941 for some confusion about whether this is correct or not.

## Limitations

Different subtypes of references could be defined through additional fields on
the `m.relates_to` object, to distinguish between replies, threads, etc.
This MSC doesn't attempt to define these subtypes. 

## Edge Cases

> 

Reviewer 4: Can you edit (change) a reference? Think of moving between threads, for example, or simply fixing a mistake.

Reviewer 2: This would be a question for the edits MSC.

event with another event. There are no aggregation semantics applied to
this relation.

In future, this relation or similar could replace [replies](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.2/client-server-api/#rich-replies)
and aggregate into a chain of replies (simple threads).

Reference relations are used by [MSC2241](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2241)
to tie all events together for the same verification request.

For instance, an `m.room.message` which references an existing event
would look like:

```json5
{
    // Unimportant fields omitted
    "type": "m.room.message",
    "content": {
        "msgtype": "m.text",
        "body": "i <3 shelties",
        "m.relates_to": {
            "rel_type": "m.reference",
            "event_id": "$another_event_id"
        }
    }
}
```

## Server aggregation

[MSC2674](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2674) states
that values for `rel_type` should define how the server should aggregate the
`rel_type`, and as such this MSC deliberately has no behaviour.

In future, aggregation might be achieved with a list of event IDs for
representation by [MSC2675](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2675) or

> similar.

Reviewer 3: This doesn't match the current Synapse implementation, which might be fine, but wanted to note that here.

Synapse currently returns a JSON dict which has a `chunk` of some event IDs` and optionally a `next_batch` token:

https://github.com/matrix-org/synapse/blob/86a515ccbf359ecd65a42a3f409b8f97c8f22284/synapse/handlers/relations.py#L442-L450

(I don't know of any clients which use this, so it could likely be removed, but wanted to point it out!)

Reviewer 2: @clokep when was this introduced, and why? The blame is a bit unclear, unfortunately.

Reviewer 3: > @clokep when was this introduced, and why? The blame is a bit unclear, unfortunately.

It has "always" been that way, it was originally introduced in: matrix-org/synapse#5192, when MSC1849 was a thing.

Reviewer 2: huh, alright. I thought Synapse didn't support it which is how it got downgraded - will adapt accordingly.

Reviewer 3: I'm not even sure it is useful or how much of this MSC is meant to be "document what we have" vs. "define something". 👍 

If it is unused, would be some decent CPU savings for sync and such on large accounts though. 😄

Reviewer 2: it's targeted for "what we have" at the moment. Clearly it was intended to be useful, so might as well put it in.

# MSC3267: reference relationships

## Proposal

This proposal defines a relation type (using
[MSC2674 relations](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2674))
for events to make a reference to another event.

> A `rel_type` of `m.reference` is defined as a generic way to associate an
> event with another event. There are no aggregation semantics applied to
> this relation.
> 
> In future, this relation or similar could replace [replies](https://spec.matrix.org/v1.2/client-server-api/#rich-replies)
> and aggregate into a chain of replies (simple threads), provided enough
> maintenance goes into the system to support multiple relations (see limitations).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A `rel_type` of `m.reference` is defined as a generic way to associate an
event with another event. There are no aggregation semantics applied to
this relation. The interpretation of a reference is event type specific. It might
be used to relate different verification events to each other or answers in a
poll or updates to locations. This simplifies specifying new event types without
having to also specify new relation types for each of them

There will be no meaning attached to a reference without a specific event type.
It is not intended to be used for replies, threads or other use cases, that can use different
event types. Those should use semantic relations like `m.thread` or `m.in_reply_to` instead.
```

Basically please get rid of suggesting usages like replies or threads. We specifically chose different solutions for those in the past. It would also make the meaning of `m.reference` ambiguous. Is my verification event suddenly a reply?

Reviewer: Yeah, the wording was just a suggestion since my previous comment wasn't clear enough that I was specifically objecting to that paragraph :3

# MSC3267: reference relationships

## Proposal

This proposal defines a relation type (using
[MSC2674 relations](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-doc/pull/2674))
for events to make a reference to another event.

A `rel_type` of `m.reference` is defined as a generic way to associate an
event with another event. As a bundle, `m.reference` relations appear as
an object with a single `chunk` field. The `chunk` is an array of objects
with a single `event_id` field for all the child events which `m.reference`

> the parent.

Reviewer 3: It is just the first "page" of results, if there's a `next_token`, that can be given to `/relations` to get the rest.
